# emotion-dynamics
Emotion dynamics of content co-creation in fanfiction communities

It is recommended that you begin viewing the notebooks starting with first_overview, and then move on to warriors, where the steps of the analysis are explained in detail. Then proceed by viewing the remaining six communities, and conclude with final_results, where some results are drawn from combining the analysis of the seven communities.

The work is not yet final, and I reserve the right to improve the code and description of it.

## Abstract
In few years, there will be more books in computers and digital devices than does in our material literary collections, and with this the dynamics of reading a work take on new forms.
The end of deep reading is a commonplace in public debates, especially when it comes to young people, books and the digital age. In contrast, however, young readers are writing and commenting on literary and non-literary texts at an unprecedentedly increasing rate. These users who act as both producers and consumers, in the publishing industry, are known as prosumers. They are capable of influencing the publications of works, generating discussions but most importantly engaging the communities around them. The content generated turns out to be of great value and gives rise to what are called the new avenues for publishing works by authors.
Specifically, prosumers are identified as the millions of users who participate and contribute to online communities of interest, called fanfiction communities. Fanfiction communities are communities that collect existing stories and create new content from them. Platforms such as Wattpad, Fanfiction, Archive of Our Own, and specific communities on Reddit represent this reality, and go one step beyond canonical content by offering alternative content. Here readers share their thoughts and emotional reactions to specific paragraphs, or to the entire work. The comments that readers write briefly and spontaneously interrupt their reading activity, before continuing it. This provides access to detailed data of what readers think about the work as long as they read it, providing real-time data, as a kind of thinking aloud. The goal is to bring readers and users who actively participate in these online communities back to the center of attention.
The phenomenon of digital social reading needs to be considered for two main reasons. The first is that there is a great amount of reading activity taking place on digital social platform such as Wattpad, which as of 2019 boasts more than 80 million monthly visitors. The second is that user comments, in the margins of chapters, are an invaluable source for empirically studying their judgments, and the emotional valence of these.
This thesis presents several analyses of how fiction is transmitted and experienced by readers, via the Archive of Our Own (abbreviated as AO3) shared reading platform. The dataset analyzed contains hundreds of thousands of fan-written stories, millions of users, and tens of millions of interactions between them. Specifically, the research consists of collecting and analyzing user-generated content from fanfiction communities, and studying the dynamics of content co-creation. To characterize the generated themes and content, their relevance, temporal aspects, and conflict and collaboration dynamics, as well as the roles of authors and non-authors, their performance, and influence in communities, specific metrics are implemented that identify structural and emotional properties of comment text.
The study focuses on the analysis of emotions and feelings of users’ comments, with respect to a work. There are lexicons with associated experimental studies, that is, dictionaries where words are linked to feelings. The LIWC dictionary can analyze some text and capture multiple categories of emotions. Comments from a work are aggregated and sentiment analysis is conducted on these to highlight emotions and how they vary over time, to infer patterns and abstract global considerations valid for all communities.
Since fan-created content takes inspiration from well-known books, comic books, movies, and TV shows, new communities arise around the title of a work, a universe, or an author. The dataset analyzed covers seven of these communities, and they were selected to ensure some diversity in both size and content type. From communities with millions of users and hundreds of thousands of works to communities with a few thousand users and hundreds of works, the list of chosen communities includes the following names: Marvel, Harry Potter, Sherlock Holmes, Percy Jackson, The Lord of the Rings, Twilight, and Warriors. The prosumers’ behaviour was modeled using their footprints left on the Archive of Our Own website, thanks to features made available by the platform itself, such as leaving a comment to discuss or share insights and reflections, and leaving a kudos to support the authors’ work.
The analysis finds its foundation in two data structures: one containing general information of the works of the different communities, such as author, title, summary, tags, number of kudos, number of comments; the other containing the information of the comments related to a single work, organized in threads, with specific information such as the author of that comment, an identifier to the comment to which the user is responding, date and time of posting, and text of the comment.
Social and textual dimensions are explored for works written in the English language and spread throughout much of the world. The investigation is divided into three groups of reflection: analyzing certain categories of emotions and studying their different presence, in terms of percentages, among different communities; analyzing individual communities to infer context and find similar characteristics; and analyzing authors’ behaviours to see how their involvement changes when they comment in response under their own works versus when they respond to works that are not theirs. Focusing on authors and their activities, as well as seeing the network of comments under a work from the author’s perspective, is key to better understanding these complex sociotechnical digital networks.
The work is conducted on a collective scale: sentiment values are calculated as the sum of all readers’ comments. The result expresses the emotional valence of a collective act of reading. In this sense LIWC is used with its default features. Comment sentences are broken into tokens, that is, taken by single word at a time, and aggregated in their entirety, or by entities, such as work, community, work chapters, author, non-author, or even by temporal aspects such as day or month. Emotional arcs are then plotted using the moving window procedure technique, to maintain a minimum of distortion of the original sentiment values: the scores for each text chunk, in fact, are simply recalculated as the average of all surrounding scores (by default, always around 10% of the total). Finally, and unlike other studies, the comments are grouped into a single text chunk and not as the average of the sentiment values of each individual comment. This approach was necessary because LIWC takes into account word frequency to calculate sentiments: scores for long chunks are statistically more reliable than shorter ones. In fact, on short comments, you have discrete variables, i.e., the comments consist of one, two or three words and the percentages of sentiments do not distribute correctly as they do on longer texts, where moreover the noise generated by parts of human language that are difficult to capture, such as sarcasm, is also mitigated.
In general, the sentiments of the comments are easy to interpret, as they are often short and a direct expression of the readers’ thoughts and emotions.
The results of the analysis show the growth of an overall increase in the use of fanfiction platforms from 2020, the year the Covid-19 pandemic begins. Moreover, on long texts, positive emotions are strongly negatively affected compared to any other category of emotion. A further educational result suggests that authors of works behave differently when commenting on others’ works with regard to the expression of negative words. Compared with an average commentator, they criticize more and use fewer words of appreciation.
The entire research work is part of the larger European project Mobius, an initiative funded under the European Commission’s Horizon 2020 program that aims to modernize the European publishing industry by reshaping traditional value chains and business models, uncovering the potential of prosumers and offering new enriched media experiences.
